Record layout syntax proposal (#1)
rohanjr/ghc-proposals: proposals/0000-record-with-syntax.rst

Record ``with`` syntax
=======================

.. proposal-number:: Leave blank. This will be filled in when the proposal is
                     accepted.
.. ticket-url:: Leave blank. This will eventually be filled with the
                ticket URL which will track the progress of the
                implementation of the feature.
.. implemented:: Leave blank. This will be filled in with the first GHC version which
                 implements the described feature.
.. highlight:: haskell
.. header:: This proposal is `discussed at this pull request <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/0>`_.
            **After creating the pull request, edit this file again, update the
            number in the link, and delete this bold sentence.**
.. sectnum::
.. contents::

We propose a layout syntax for records, triggered by a new keyword ``with``.

> This means that record fields in type declarations, expressions and patterns can be formatted using indentation instead of punctuation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a consequence, record fields in type declarations, expressions and patterns can be formatted using indentation instead of punctuation.
```

> This is consistent with the use of layout for other constructs that span several lines (e.g. ``do`` blocks, branches of ``case`` statements).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is consistent with the use of layout for other constructs that span several lines (e.g. ``do`` blocks, branches of ``case`` statements).
```

> The advantage is that large records can be formatted in a more readable and consistent way.

Reviewer 2: I suggest moving this up to be the second sentence. 
We propose...
We are proposing this because...
It works like this...
It's consistent with other parts of the language.

Author: Swapping 3rd and 4th sentences

Motivation
----------
Record syntax in Haskell uses curly braces and commas. For example, you can declare a record type as follows:
::

 data Rec = Rec { field1 :: Int, field2 :: Bool }

> You can construct and pattern match on expressions of this type using the corresponding syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can construct and pattern match on expressions of this type using the syntax
```

::

 Rec { field1 = f1, field2 = f2 }

When records have a large number of fields, programmers typically spread declarations and expressions over several lines, e.g.
::

 data BigRec = BigRec
   { field1 :: Int
   , field2 :: Bool
   , field3 :: String
   , ...
   }

Similarly when constructing a big record:
::

 BigRec
   { field1 = 1
   , field2 = True
   , field3 = "hello"
   }

Indentation of the fields is not required inside the curly braces, but is usually maintained by the programmer (with varying styles of formatting).

Let's compare this situation to ``do`` blocks in monadic code.
You could write
::

  echo = do {
    line <- getLine;
    putStrLn line;
  }

But the much more standard style is to use indentation and write
::

  echo = do
    line <- getLine
    putStrLn line

> This avoids meaningless characters and the alignment of statements in the ``do`` block is checked by the parser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which avoids meaningless characters and the alignment of statements in the ``do`` block is checked by the parser.
```

So, why don't we do the same for records?
Let's double down on indentation for code formatting and enjoy beautiful records in Haskell!

We propose a keyword ``with`` that induces layout syntax for record fields.
Using ``with``, our big record declaration can be written as
::

  data BigRec = BigRec with
      field1 :: Int
      field2 :: Bool
      field3 :: String
      ...

> We could use indentation for record construction

Reviewer 2: Suggest : We can use ....

::

  Rec with
    field1 = 1
    field2 = True

> as well as for record update

Reviewer 2: Suggest : as well as for record updates

Reviewer: @shayne-fletcher-da  - you know the suggest feature, right? Make it just a commit away for Rohan.

::

  r with
    field1 = field1 r + 1
    field2 = True

Note that when we use indentation instead of punctuation in record expressions, the lines describing record fields can be freely reordered as they are.

> When using the traditional syntax, you also have to move around the braces and commas - annoying!

Reviewer: I see what you're saying here, but it's ambiguous. Suggest: Note that with indentation each line is formatted identically, so reordering the field definitions doesn't require adjusting braces or commas.

Also keep the editorialising "Annoying!" out of it.

Author: Good suggestion. I'm also trying to add Martin's comment about cleaner diffs here

::

  Rec with
    field1 = expr1
    field2 = expr2
    field3 = expr3

or we can use delimiting punctuation
::

  Rec with
    { field1 = expr1
    ; field2 = expr2
    ; field3 = expr3 }

Record update expressions look similar:
::

  r with
    field2 = newExpr2
    field3 = newExpr3

(where ``r`` is a record of type ``Rec``.)

The last construct in which ``with`` can appear is a record pattern.
For example, we can pattern match on a record ``r`` of type ``Rec`` as follows:
::

  case r of
    Rec with
      field1 = f1
      field2 = f2
      field3 = f3
        -> someExpression

Or more concisely using the ``NamedFieldPuns`` extension:
::

  case r of
    Rec with field1; field2; field3 -> someExpression

As this last example suggests, ``with`` should work seamlessly with syntax introduced by other language extensions.
Namely these are:

1. ``NamedFieldPuns``
2. ``RecordWildCards``

Working with ``RecordWildCards`` means we can construct and pattern match on records using the syntax ``Rec with ..``.
We can also write variations on this such as constructing a record with some fields explicit and some taken from the scope:
::

  let field2 = expr2
      field3 = expr3

>   in  Rec with field1 = expr1; ..

Reviewer 3: Given that this change is all about using indentation instead of `;` I assume I can also put `..` on a separate line?

Author: Good point! Will change

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------
The proposed change directly addresses the missing support for formatting records over several lines.

The change is unintrusive.
It introduces a new keyword but otherwise reuses established layout syntax.
As the change is limited to the parser, it does not require extra effort to integrate with existing extensions like ``NamedFieldPuns`` and ``RecordWildCards``.
We do not expect negative interactions with any other language features.

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------
The implementation of this feature is a small number of additions to the lexer and parser, and nothing else (see Implementation Plan).

> Our team has already implemented it in a fork of GHC used for the DAML language.

Reviewer: Link please for DAML

The mixture of semicolons and commas may be confusing, as
``Rec with { x :: Int; y :: Bool }`` looks quite similar to ``Rec { x :: Int, y :: Bool }``,
but the field delimiters are different.
This probably won't be much of an issue as ``with`` syntax will mostly be used with indentation instead of punctuation.

Alternatives
------------
There is no alternative syntax for records that I am aware of.
However, one could avoid large record expressions and patterns by using existing extensions such as ``NamedFieldPuns`` or ``RecordWildCards``.
For example, you can bind field names using a ``let`` or ``where`` block outside of a record expression:
::

  let field1 = expr1
      field2 = expr2
      ...
      fieldN = exprN
  in
  Rec {..}

Another example is using field punning for an update expression (assuming a variable ``r`` of type ``Rec``):
::

  let field1 = newExpr1
      field2 = newExpr2
  in
  r { field1, field2 }

This is in line with the Haskell idiom of using identation for blocks of name bindings.

However, these techniques are fairly limited.
For one, they do not apply to record type declarations.

> Second, they rely on bound variables being exactly the same as the field names of the record in question.

Reviewer: this leads to the possibility of errors, which is a big deal

Author: Do you mean errors using record wildcards? Like constructing a record using a variable from scope when you should have set the value explicitly?

Reviewer: Yes. If you do `let a = 1; b = 2 in Foo{..}` then maybe `a` and `b` are the fields of `Foo`. Maybe the aren't. Who knows. Maybe it's picking `b` and `c` from somewhere else entirely.

Therefore the syntactic convenience cannot be used for multiple record expressions of the same type in the same scope.
(The same is true if one needs to pattern match on multiple records of the same type in a single definition, as the field names would clash.)

Unresolved Questions
--------------------
The first obvious question is whether there's a better choice of keyword than ``with``.
We can bikeshed this, but I think ``with`` is fairly natural in most of the record constructs
(plus it has precedent in OCaml for record updates).
We can also reconsider the name of the language extension, e.g. ``RecordLayout``.

Another question is how to print records ``with`` in error messages.
Ideally we should print errors using the syntax used by the programmer, so an error in code using ``with`` syntax is printed using ``with`` (and indentation).
However, doing this would require extra information in the AST nodes for all record constructs, indicating whether ``with`` syntax was used or not.

> I believe that the implementation cost is not worth the benefit, and we can consider traditional record syntax the "normal form" to pretty print.

Reviewer 3: Given how much effort went into adding enough information to GHC’s AST to get things like `ghc-exactprint` to work, I disagree with that. IMHO new syntax extensions have to live up to that standard.

Reviewer: Agree with Moritz.

Author: Ok, so you mean that the pretty printer should respect the choice of syntax? So we should store a Bool in the AST nodes for records indicating if `with` is used? And then I assume we can print everything using `with` using newlines and indentation? That seems to be how `do` blocks are printed (i.e. they are printed using indentation even if the user wrote `do { ...; ... }`).

Reviewer: Yes, it doesn't have to be character for character (although I believe those are stored in the Ann field), but whether a with was used or not should be recorded.

Reviewer 3: Sorry I was a bit unclear on what I meant here. I was referring to [GHC API annotations](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/wikis/api-annotations) which do allow character-to-character roundtripping (e.g. for do notation they allow you to roundtrip to the syntax that the user used initially). https://github.com/alanz/ghc-exactprint/ demonstrates this nicely. I care about being able to do the same thing for `with`-syntax. I don’t care too much about what shows up in error messages, especially if there is already precedent for being a bit more relaxed in `do`-notation.

I don't think this will cause much confusion for users.
Note that the error location should still be shown using the user's code verbatim.

Implementation Plan
-------------------
The proposal author and collaborators volunteer to implement the change.
The implementation does not require any other changes in advance, and can be put together fairly quickly (within a few weeks).

The implementation entails minor additions to the lexer and parser.
The ``with`` keyword will be added to the lexer (conditional on the language extension being set) and to the layout syntax handling.
Extra parser rules will be added to allow ``with`` followed by record fields within virtual braces, in all places where traditional record syntax is used.
Location information for records ``with`` will also be stored during parsing.

> There should be no changes to any AST or pretty printers.

Reviewer: Not true given above.

Record ``with`` syntax
=======================

.. proposal-number:: Leave blank. This will be filled in when the proposal is
                     accepted.
.. ticket-url:: Leave blank. This will eventually be filled with the
                ticket URL which will track the progress of the
                implementation of the feature.
.. implemented:: Leave blank. This will be filled in with the first GHC version which
                 implements the described feature.
.. highlight:: haskell
.. header:: This proposal is `discussed at this pull request <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/0>`_.
            **After creating the pull request, edit this file again, update the
            number in the link, and delete this bold sentence.**
.. sectnum::
.. contents::

> We propose a layout syntax for records.

Author: Will edit

A type declaration looks like
::

  data Rec = Rec with
    field1 :: T1
    field2 :: T2
    ...
    fieldN :: TN

and an expression looks like
::

  Rec with
    field1 = expr1
    field2 = expr2
    ...
    fieldN = exprN

The advantage is cleaner, indentation-based formatting for large records.

Motivation
----------
Record syntax in Haskell uses curly braces and commas. For example, you can declare a record type as follows:
::

>  data Rec = Rec { field1 :: Int, field2 :: Bool }

Author: I personally find `FooBar` harder to read than the more boring `fieldN`. The latter helps me ignore the names and just look at the structure/formatting. Not sure if that's just me though.

>  data Rec = Rec { field1 :: Int, field2 :: Bool }

Reviewer: I think the field1/field2 is much easier to follow. Perhaps use Rec and MkRec though, to disambiguate those different names?

You can construct and pattern match on expressions of this type using the corresponding syntax
::

>  Rec { field1 = expr1, field2 = expr2 }

Author: True, I could maybe just use `f1` and `f2` instead of `expr`.

When records have a large number of fields, programmers typically spread declarations and expressions over several lines, e.g.
::

 data BigRec = BigRec
   { field1 :: Int
   , field2 :: Bool
   , field3 :: String
   , ...
   }

Similarly when constructing a big record:
::

 BigRec
   { field1 = 1
   , field2 = True
   , field3 = "hello"
   }

Indentation of the fields is not required inside the curly braces, but is usually maintained by the programmer (with varying styles of formatting).

Let's compare this situation to ``do`` blocks in monadic code.
You could write
::

  echo = do {
    line <- getLine;
    putStrLn line;
  }

But the much more standard style is to use indentation and write
::

  echo = do
    line <- getLine
    putStrLn line

> This looks cleaner and the alignment of statements in the ``do`` block is checked by the parser.

Author: Changing to "avoids meaningless characters"

So, why don't we do the same for records?

> Let's double down on indentation for code formatting and enjoy beautiful records in Haskell!

Reviewer: I'd replace these two sentences with something more dry like "This proposal brings indentation sensitive records to Haskell." It's a controversial proposal, so no need to up the ante.

We propose a keyword ``with`` that induces layout syntax for record fields.
Then we can write our big record declaration as follows:
::

  data BigRec = BigRec with
      field1 :: Int
      field2 :: Bool
      field3 :: String
      ...

We could use indentation for record construction
::

  Rec with
    field1 = 1
    field2 = True

as well as for record update
::

  r with
    field1 = field1 r + 1
    field2 = True

Note that when we use indentation instead of punctuation in record expressions, the lines describing record fields can be freely reordered as they are.

> This is not true when using the traditional braces and commas!

Author: I mean, if you have
data Rec = Rec
    { field1 :: Int
    , field2 :: Bool }
then you can't simply swap the lines to reorder, you have to mess with the punctuation too. Annoying. Haskell doesn't seem to allow leading/trailing commas either so you can't come up with a style that allows this. I could explain this in the text

> We believe this syntax is visually cleaner than the traditional syntax in many cases.

Author: Edited

It has the potential to make code manipulating large records significantly easier to read and modify.
Overall, we think this change is a natural and idiomatic extension to the Haskell language.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------
We propose a language extension which enables layout syntax for records.

> With the extension turned on, there is an additional keyword ``with`` which induces layout syntax for record fields.

Reviewer 2: suggest "turned on" -> "enabled".

The structure and formatting options are very similar to monadic ``do`` blocks (and other layout-inducing constructs).
Specifically, ``with`` can be followed either by indentation and newline delimiters or by curly braces ``{ }`` and semicolon ``;`` delimiters.

> For example, the following 3 declarations are all valid ways to define a record type ``Rec``:

Reviewer 2: suggest valid and equivalent

::

  data Rec = Rec with
    field1 :: T1
    field2 :: T2
    field3 :: T3

  data Rec = Rec with
    { field1 :: T1
    ; field2 :: T2
    ; field3 :: T3 }
  
  data Rec = Rec with field1 :: T1; field2 :: T2; field3 :: T3

These are all equivalent to the traditional syntax
::

  data Rec = Rec { field1 :: T1, field2 :: T2, field3 :: T3 }

(which can also be spread across multiple lines).

The ``with`` syntax can occur in any language construct where traditional record syntax usually appears.
Namely, we need to handle the following features.

1. Data type declarations
2. Record construction
3. Record field updates
4. Record patterns

We showed an example of the first case above.
Note that ``with`` should work for data types with several constructors,
as well as constructors with zero arguments.
So the following declaration is valid.
::

>   data ComplexRec = Con1 with f1 :: Int; f2 :: Bool | Con2 with | Con3 String

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we should admit `with` without field declarations. Not sure. Perhaps something for the unresolved questions section.

Author: See my question in the language channel - may be worth keeping for consistency's sake

Reviewer: We should for consistency.

(The second ``with`` is redundant but permitted.)

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps, "we propose the second `with` although redundant be permitted`" but again, not convinced.

Author: I should perhaps say why we permit it here

Reviewer: permitted for consistency seems sufficient.

Record update expressions look similar:
::

  r with
    field2 = newExpr2
    field3 = newExpr3

(where ``r`` is a record of type ``Rec``.)

The last construct in which ``with`` can appear is a record pattern.
For example, we can pattern match on a record ``r`` of type ``Rec`` as follows:
::

  case r of
    Rec with
      field1 = f1
      field2 = f2
      field3 = f3
        -> someExpression

Or more concisely using the ``NamedFieldPuns`` extension:
::

  case r of
    Rec with field1; field2; field3 -> someExpression

As this last example suggests, ``with`` should work seamlessly with syntax introduced by other language extensions.
Namely these are:

1. ``NamedFieldPuns``
2. ``RecordWildCards``

Working with ``RecordWildCards`` means we can construct and pattern match on records using the syntax ``Rec with ..``.
We can also write variations on this such as constructing a record with some fields explicit and some taken from the scope:
::

  let field2 = expr2
      field3 = expr3
  in  Rec with field1 = expr1; ..

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------
The proposed change directly addresses the missing support for formatting records over several lines.

> I believe the change is unintrusive: it introduces a new keyword but otherwise reuses established layout syntax.

Reviewer 2: Maybe, drop the "I believe". Just, "The change is unintrusive. A new keyword is introduced but otherwise reuses well established layout rules."

> I expect minimal effort to integrate the new syntax with existing extensions to record syntax (i.e. ``NamedFieldPuns`` and ``RecordWildCards``).

Reviewer 2: The extension can be implemented entirely in the parser, "plays nicely" with existing extensions like `NamedFieldPuns` and `RecordWildcards` and we do not anticipate any negative interactions with existing language features.

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------

> The cost of implementing this feature is very small.

Reviewer 2: Suggest, "The implementation can be obtained with a small number of additional productions in the parser and nothing else".

> Our team has implemented it in the fork of GHC used for the DAML language.

Reviewer 2: I'd scrap this sentence.

Author: Is it not significant that we have an implementation and have used the feature in anger without any ill effects? Maybe I explain why I'm mentioning it here

> Therefore the implementation cost is well understood (probably under a couple of weeks work) and can be refined for a patch to GHC proper.

Reviewer 2: Ditto.

Reviewer: Delete this. Initial implementation cost is irrelevant. It's the maintenance cost that matters.

The affected code is fairly small (see Implementation Plan).
The main maintenance cost I can forsee is of the new parser productions.

> Any changes to the grammar or parser structure around records will have to take the few new rules into account.

Reviewer 2: suggest delete this sentence

> I believe the proposed change could be *more* intuitive for novice users.

Reviewer 2: Suggest " we contend the proposed change addresses a 'consistency gap' in the language and will prove naturally intuitive to users".

> The ``with`` syntax is consistent with other occurrences of layout syntax and promotes the use of indentation across the board.

Reviewer 2: 👍

> It avoids questions around the placement of braces and commas as well as the need for alignment conventions.

Reviewer 2: 👍 ... and can have the pleasing effect of removing much syntactic noise.

> The possible drawback is that there would be two different syntaxes to be aware of.

Reviewer 2: I don't know. You have to know Haskell 2010 - use of the extension is not required or enabled without the user explicitly asking for it. Ah, yes, perhaps readers of other peoples programs - fair.

> One would need to decide on a style for a project and be consistent with it.

Reviewer 2: Suggest delete this sentence.

Author: Deleting

Also, the choice between semicolons and commas could be confusing, as
``Rec with { x :: Int; y :: Bool }`` looks quite similar to ``Rec { x :: Int, y :: Bool }``,

> but the field delimiters are different.

Reviewer 2: I would say if you turn `with` on it's because you want to avoid ',' and ';' entirely. I personally don't really think that it is as confusing as all that for what its worth - maybe. So, suggest, "*might* be of some initial confusion to beginners".

Author: Agree. Will leave in for now with some slight rewording. I can delete this whole paragraph if others agree

Reviewer: I think this is useful to keep

> This probably won't be much of an issue as ``with`` syntax will mostly be used with indentation instead of punctuation.

Reviewer 2: 👍

> However, it may cause mistakes for users switching back and forth between syntaxes in different projects.

Reviewer 2: Suggest delete.

Author: Deleting this sentence

Alternatives
------------
There is no alternative syntax for records that I am aware of.

> However, one could avoid large record expressions and patterns by using existing extensions such as ``NamedFieldPuns`` or ``RecordWildCards``.

Reviewer 2: Read the twitter threads around "4 tweaks to Haskell". There have been one or two suggestions showing how one can emulate `with`.

Reviewer 2: Reading on, looks like you've covered that.

> However, one could avoid large record expressions and patterns by using existing extensions such as ``NamedFieldPuns`` or ``RecordWildCards``.

Reviewer 2: You can't use `NamedFieldPuns` or `RecordWildCards` in definitions - no benefit there.

Author: Yeah, I mention that below

For example, you can bind field names using a ``let`` or ``where`` block outside of a record expression:
::

  let field1 = expr1
      field2 = expr2
      ...
      fieldN = exprN
  in
  Rec {..}

Another example is using field punning for an update expression (assuming a variable ``r`` of type ``Rec``):
::

  let field1 = newExpr1
      field2 = newExpr2
  in
  r { field1, field2 }

This is in line with the Haskell idiom of using identation for blocks of name bindings.

However, these techniques are fairly limited.
For one, they do not apply to record type declarations.
Second, they rely on bound variables being exactly the same as the field names of the record in question.
Therefore the syntactic convenience cannot be used for multiple record expressions of the same type in the same scope.
(The same is true if one needs to pattern match on multiple records of the same type in a single definition, as the field names would clash.)

Unresolved Questions
--------------------
The first obvious question is whether there's a better choice of keyword than ``with``.

> We can bikeshed this, but I think ``with`` is fairly natural in most of the record constructs.

Reviewer 2: Don't think it's worth mentioning but it has precedent in other FP languages in this context (e.g. at least ocaml).

Author: Ah right, for updates. Good point

> We can also reconsider the name of the language extension, e.g. ``RecordLayout``.

Reviewer 2: I think @neil favors `RecordWith`?

Author: I do too

Reviewer: I don't care.

> Next, should traditional record syntax be prohibited when the language extension is on?

Reviewer 2: I'm already saying definitely not and think this should be deleted. I argue this is an extension - an augmentation - not something that could be abused to disallow core Haskell2010 syntax.

Author: I agree, I can just delete this whole paragraph

> This would enforce the discipline that only a single record syntax be used in a single file/project.

Reviewer 2: Why is that so important?

Author: Deleting. I mean it just for the sake of consistency. But I think it's not too important

> However I think this is overly prescriptive and that the extension should only enable new syntax, not restrict.

Reviewer 2: 👍

Another question is how to print records ``with`` in error messages.
Ideally we should print errors using the syntax used by the programmer, so an error in code using ``with`` syntax is printed using ``with`` (and indentation).
However, doing this would require extra information in the AST nodes for all record constructs, indicating whether ``with`` syntax was used or not.
I believe that the implementation cost is not worth the benefit, and we can consider traditional record syntax the "normal form" to pretty print.
I don't think this will cause much confusion for users.
Note that the error location should still be shown using the user's code verbatim.

Implementation Plan
-------------------

> I volunteer to implement the change in collaboration with the team at Digital Asset.

Reviewer 2: suggest, "We (the proposal authors) volunteer ..."

Author: How about "The proposal author and collaborators volunteer"? Since there will be only one author on the PR?

Reviewer 2: I'll let @neil chime in but I think:
  - Take ownership of the proposal and the implementation (use "we" or "I"  volunteer to implement it);
 - Let us avoid using Digital Asset to identify ourselves.

Reviewer 2: "I volunteer to implement the extension should it be accepted" or something like that works for me.

> The implementation does not require any other changes in advance, and can be put together fairly quickly (within a few weeks).

Reviewer 2: Not relevant I think. The proposal shouldn't be judged on how long it's likely to take to implement.

Author: Not sure. It seems relevant if we basically have a working implementation ready -- it shows we can actually follow through on current day Haskell and that there are no huge unexpected interactions

Reviewer 2: I agree it's not without relevance : it can go to justifying our claims about not interacting in unanticipated ways with existing language features or extensions. Maybe try to work it in there but again, I would prefer a way to do so that does not bring Digital Asset or DAML into the proposal.

Reviewer: Say we have an existing implementation, because that's highly relevant - call it preliminary or prototype to hedge your bets. But how much work it is is irrelevant.
